So for those of you on the East Coast of
America, good morning.
For those of you on the West Coast and
very early morning and in Europe,
good afternoon.
And if you're in Asia, well, good night.
I'm going to be talking about scattered
radiation, understanding the basics.
That's the title I've been given,
and my name is Andy Rogers.
I'm a lead interventional medical
physicist at Nottingham University
Hospitals and the University of
Nottingham School of Medicine.
So that's the title,
but what am I actually going to be
talking about?
So I'm going to be doing the physics.
Oh my goodness, I hear you all say.
And then I'm going to be doing the
implication for the real world of that
physics, which is a bit more,
I think what you want to know.
But we've got to do the basics,
so bear with me, guys.
So the physics,
it's about scattered radiation.
And in physics we called scattered
radiation from X-rays Compton scatter.
So that's why I've put that name there
and come to scatter.
What is it?
This is what happens when a photon and
you call the photon the X-ray beam or the
X-rays,
it hits an electron and is scattered off
it.
And what's an electron?
Well, for you,
the electron is part of your patient.
So we're really talking about the X-rays
coming out of your X-ray tube,
smacking into the patient and bouncing
off.
So that's all very well.
And the diagram shows that the X-rays
come in, they've got a certain wavelength,
and they go off with a different
wavelength.
And what that means in your term is a
slightly different energy.
So where do these scattered X-rays end up?
What's the physics of that?
Well,
the physics is something called the Klein
Machiner formula.
There was no way I was going to put it in
the slide, way too complicated.
But essentially at the energies you guys
use in interventional radiology,
if we've got any cardiologists in
interventional cardiology,
you're looking at that brown peanut
shaped curve.
And what that's telling you is you're
slightly more likely to get forward
scatter than backward scatter and there's
less goes sideways.
But that's the physics world and that
we're not really interested in that.
We're interested in the real world.
What does this mean for staff Scatter?
And rather counter intuitively,
it's completely the opposite.
And why is that?
Well,
the physics is telling us what happens
when an X-ray hits an electron at a point
in space.
You've got a patient,
which is billions of points.
So what are the issues about that?
Well,
as your X-rays penetrate through the
patient,
there are actually less X-rays to be
scattered in the 1st place.
So the deeper you go into the patient,
the less scatter there is.
Now we said that in physics world,
forward scatter is the most likely.
However, because it's scattered forward,
it's then self attenuated by the patient.
So actually less is coming out in a
forward direction and because most of the
backscatter happens very close to the
entrance surface of the patient,
less of that is in is actually attenuated.
So what we get as a net result,
and I see Bella's scratching her head
here is and you,
you may have come across these sorts of
slides before we get these colour coded
contours of where the radiation is going
in real life from a real patient.
And what you can see on the left is in
the AP direction.
Most of it's coming out at your midriff
and at your legs and ankles and feet.
Now obviously you wear protection and
talks later in this session are going to
go into that in more detail.
I'm not.
I'm just doing the basics.
And if we look at the right hand side,
we've got the lateral direction,
the lateral beam.
And unfortunately for this operator there
stood right next to the tube,
which is absolutely the worst place to be.
And what you can see is there's probably
about an order of magnitude difference in
scatter dose rate between standing by the
tube and standing the other side by the
detector.
Slightly counterintuitive.
You think you're looking back at the tube.
Oh my goodness, it's aimed at me.
That is absolutely the best place to be.
But these are just generic numbers.
How can I find out the numbers for my
actual machine?
Well, there is a way,
but I'm not actually going to recommend
that to you because I think this is where
you work with medical physics.
But in the suppliers IFU,
and I've put that in inverted commas
because it stands for Instructions for
Use.
It's often called the operator manuals.
Towards the back somewhere,
they'll have scatter curves.
They'll tell you how they did the
experiment.
They probably had some perspex in the
beam,
and they measured the radiation all
around their kit.
And this is a Phillips one, I think,
from an Azurian interventional unit.
And what we can see is it's generally
scattering all over the place.
There's the lateral,
but this is only for a machine with no
one in position, no shielding.
So it's not really like the real world.
So we've got to actually think what's
hitting you guys and how do we know?
The other thing we have to think about is
real life X-ray beams.
And what we find is these days with
modern interventional units,
they have a lot of copper filtration in
the beam.
And what this curve is showing you from a,
a reference from Dave Sutton ET al back
in 2012 is that very roughly for the
heavily filtered fluoro beams,
you get about twice the scatter rate than
you do when you've got no copper in the
beam.
And Oh my goodness, I hear you will say.
But however, when you're using,
and this is per unit dose area products,
so per unit dose hitting the patient.
But the good news is that when you use a
heavily filtered beam,
hopefully you're using less patient dose
anyway.
So hopefully these two effects offset.
So I've tried to put this into numbers
when I'm doing sort of mental maths in my
head.
What do I actually use?
So for 0 copper filter,
the worst scatter in that red probably is
about 5 micro grey at a meter per unit
dose to the patient,
which is in grey centimetres squared.
And when you get the heavily filtered
beam, we're up to about double that,
just under 10.
So these are the ballpark figures I use
in my head to work out what the sort of
dose rates are round about,
where you guys and scrub nurses and
radiographer techs,
where they're standing.
And this is how we do it.
So in summary, the physics is great,
but what you need to know about is
reality.
What happens in your lab,
scatter comes from your patient.
In real life,
it mainly comes backwards and sideways.
And just beware working on the patient
tube side.
Now,
I'm sure you're going to have lots of
questions at the end.
There's AQ and A at the end of this
session.
So I look forward to meeting you all in
reality and you'll see my ugly face
properly.
Thank you very much.
Hello, I'm Patrick Muck.
I'm the Chief of Vascular Surgery,
the program Director of vascular Surgery
at Trihealth Good Samaritan Hospital in
Cincinnati, OH.
Today I'm fortunate to go over the topic
access techniques and how they impact
radiation exposure and our practice.
Those are my disclosures.
Being a vascular surgeon, you know,
often times we do some large Thraco
abdominal aneurysm repairs such as this
and those situations that you can see how
we typically dress without any lead
protection.
But the reality is,
is that with all the technology,
there's less and less open surgery,
more and more endovascular and more and
more radiation.
We know that personal lead shielding
started somewhere around 1928,
so almost a century ago.
And you can see here with, with Emily,
our integrated 5th year resident,
that there's really sometimes difficult,
it's difficult to provide appropriate
radiation protection when you're doing
cases such as this,
as I'm going to highlight.
And as a vascular surgeon, you know,
we just don't go femoral or radio.
We go radio brachial.
We do crowded access for tea cars.
We do femoral papatito approaches for PE
and DVT and we do pedal approaches as
well.
So as you can imagine,
this is what I need to be wearing day in
and day out.
And there's definitely room for
improvement in 2025.
So I think by now we all know that the
there's failures of standard lead aprons,
it only covers about 60 to 70% of the
body.
And not to mention it can weigh a lot,
up to 24 lbs and cause significant
orthopaedic issues.
So I would argue that there's room for
improvement.
The problem with radiation exposure is
it's hidden, you know,
from left to right you can see somebody
the, the dangers of working in a,
in a being a crane operator.
If you're Mike Tyson and have a pet tiger
like this,
obviously there's risk to that if you
skydive there, the third one,
or if you're crazy enough to ride a bike
along a dam,
those are obvious dangers that are right
in your face.
But radiation exposure is hidden.
And it's pretty obvious that, you know,
if you don't want a sunburn or radiation
injury,
then you should really not go out into
the sun.
And we know it causes cataracts,
ortho orthopedic injuries,
stochastic effects of skin changes and
cancer.
And so I really think it's important that
we protect ourselves just as much as we
protect our patients.
As mentioned, more and more is open,
less and excuse me,
more and more is endovascular and less
and less is open.
And here's data from 2019 showing the
explosion of endovascular aneurysm repair
replace an open surgery for aneurysms.
It's not just aneurysms.
If you look at peripheral arterial
disease from 2011 to 2016, again,
you see more and more endo,
more and more radiation,
less and less open surgery in particular.
There's also been an explosion in the
infrapopathile growth and with that,
more radiation as we do more and more
endovascular work.
I literally just broke my patients just
being moved out of the hybrid room.
I just got done doing a TCAR and without
a doubt TCAR is continuing to increase in
adoption.
With that,
you're right next to the radiation source
in the image intensifier.
And so these various access points are a
real problem for the operator,
but not only the operator at the RN and
the RT and the anesthesiologist in the
room as well.
So we need to to take this seriously here.
You can see, you know,
when here we have Emily doing a dialysis
procedure here we're doing a filter
retrieval here we're doing some more
endovascular work in the picture in the
middle here really depicts the problem.
Whatever your access point is,
you have radiation coming up and scatter
as egg medical will tell you what their,
what their slogan scatter absolutely
matters.
You know,
we're also doing more and more physician
modified and endograph cases here to the
to the left.
You can see what we're doing here in the
middle, we have our TAMBI.
Here is the upper extremity.
Here's the femoral axis for a TMB
procedure we're doing in all access
points.
And here we're going through the brachial.
By the way,
the shield's not low enough and and so
radiation is an absolute problem in these
situations.
As I mentioned,
just got done doing a TCAR and for those
of you you're not familiar with it,
TCARS where you do a small incision in
the neck do access and we're able to
induce flow reversal for our crowded
stent here.
But you're right next to the eye,
eye and the radiation absolutely matters.
Your head and neck are right next to the
image intensifier.
Here's a case I did not too long ago,
a left sided lesion.
Here you can see our Wheatlander
retractors as we're obtaining exposure
through our cut down for the T car.
And here you can see Emily,
our integrated resident doesn't know how
to get a shield on the left side of the
table here.
And so you know these various access
points are a real health problem for us.
So Tcars a problem,
lower extremity work with tibial and
pedal accesses are a problem,
IVC problems, dialysis procedures, PES,
and of course venous stenting continues
to increase.
So as I'm now 55 years old,
I've been doing the,
the program directorship for the last 18
years.
I feel like it's my responsibility,
my generation to advocate for safer labs,
better tools and invest in long term,
long term health of our staff and
ourselves.
And it's just not the physician.
What about our team members?
I think it's a, a moral imperative for us.
You know,
I may do 6 to 15 cases a week as a
vascular surgeon.
Well, we've got 6 vascular surgeons,
3 IRI kind of joked that sometimes in
neurosurgeons,
I'm not certain they really care about
folks, but that's of course a joke.
But All in all,
our RTS and RNS are doing 40 to 60 cases
a week from various access points.
And so personal protection is a problem
here at Good Samaritan, unfortunately.
Unfortunately, we have a, a,
an RT who was just diagnosed with a left
eye cataract.
Obviously,
the radiation sources closer to the left.
And a good buddy of mine had a skin
lesion on his ear that was radiation
induced.
So I think there's got to be a better way
because without a doubt,
these various access points don't allow
for appropriate protection.
So what's changed?
Barrier protection or,
or or shielding here locally,
as I mentioned,
egg medical recently was introduced into
the Christ Hospital.
You all know this gentleman,
Doctor Dean Kiriakis,
not only known here in the city or in the
country,
but throughout the world for his
incredible work as an interventional
cardiologist.
And he really, you know this,
this interview on Channel 5 here locally
advocated the benefits of the egg medical
system and with the tag phrase,
the scatter matters.
And if you're not familiar with it,
this is really enhanced radiation barrier
protection that is in does an incredible
job for cardiology work,
peripheral work as well as our with our
neurosurgery colleagues.
There's also another company Rampart,
by now I'm certain you're familiar with
it,
but they have also enhanced barrier
protection.
What I like about their system is I call
these mud flaps,
it's a trifold or or three different
Shields that you can utilize.
And with that,
as I'll show you here in a second,
they have lead barriers that come down
and kind of can can wrap around your
access points and help with this scatter.
And this is what we recently start
utilizing for our procedures.
They have that coupled with the really
solid lead Shields on the side of the
patients.
And so this is really,
really refreshing for us and my partners
here with them,
you can often times obviate the need for
heavy lead, lead aprons all together.
Here's their defender system,
here's the Guardian system.
And here again is is just the defender
and your ability to, as they say,
shed the lead just like egg.
There's data out there purporting that
with the Rampart system,
you have 20 times less radiation than the
traditional lead shield and aprons.
And I cannot emphasize enough how
important this is for physicians, techs,
nurses in the entire room.
And here's some data,
the red and the blue,
you can see a unbelievable drop in the in
the radiation exposure with Rampart
compared to the traditional lead apron
here in Cincinnati.
I'd like to say that the future is now.
You know, if you're in Japan,
they've got drones kind of directing
traffic in real time to to minimize your
time out of a concert when I'm visiting
my daughter in San Francisco.
Here's a way MO.
And so we got with the times earlier this
year,
we start utilizing the defender system.
Here's our now attending down in Stuart,
FL Jake Shapiro along with Kathy doing a
symplavium procedure without any lead.
So it's really exciting.
I did this about two weeks ago.
Technically Emily here she is positioning
the guardian and again it's got the three
Shields as well as the mudflaps.
And with an EVAR, she received only 0.
2 milligrams, which to me is, is,
is phenomenal.
And not only that, here's Cody,
our other fellow.
It's total room protection.
You know,
if you take a flight from New York to San
Francisco,
you get about two to 2 1/2 Miller rims.
She can do 10 EVARS and still get less
radiation exposure than a
transcontinental flight like that.
And obviously, you know, I,
I say the word mudflaps.
I'm trying to just highlight how I think
of it or how I explain it to patients,
but just invention.
This is a lead shield hanging off the
table here.
So it really minimizes it on the
borderline, eliminates it really.
And so here's a a fenestrated
endovascular aneurysm repair.
Here's the Guardian.
Joey, our middle tech here, you know,
did his research with Rampart and
realized he does not need lead.
Personally,
I'm just doing a little bit more research
before we get there.
But I do envision here in the near future,
we're going to have not enough data
accrued that's going to show that in fact
we can shed the lead.
And mind you,
this is a traditional case that we did
last Tuesday,
just a standard bilateral iliac,
a stenting.
We had three milligrams with a
traditional one lead shield.
So that's 15 more times exposure than the
E bar that Emily did.
And so we're going to continue to accrue
data.
We are super excited these various access
points.
That's where this this guardian is so
incredible.
We can bring it up for radio,
we can bring it up for brachial, femoral,
Papatil.
We can do it for jugular,
for filter retrievals and then pedal as
well.
And so we're really excited and I can't
thank the Rampart team enough for
directing us in the right direction for
radiation mitigation.
So until then,
thanks again for being allowing me to be
part of this meeting.
Let's all keep working hard.
Let's keep accruing data, scatter matters,
and let's shed the lead.
So thank you so much.
I appreciate this invitation.
This is a incredible symposium that is
ultra important to all of our team
members.
Thank you so much.
Hello, my name is Doctor Bill Gray.
I'm the system chief of cardiovascular
division at Mainline Health just outside
Philadelphia.
I'm professor of medicine at Thomas
Jefferson University.
Today we're going to be talking about
2025 advances in imaging and scatter
radiation,
scatter radiation reducing technologies
for safe, safer interventions.
Here are my disclosures.
I am a consultant to Radioaction,
one of the systems that we'll be seeing
we'll be discussing today.
So my brother-in-law in arms,
Kenny Rosenfeld had I thought a very
poignant quote that from a practical
moral and risk mitigation perspective,
every institution performing fluoroscopic
procedures with X-ray equipment should
equip labs with enhanced radiation
shielding solutions.
And really that's what this whole talk is
about and and the whole field which is
rapidly developing is aims to do.
So let's just set the stage a little bit
about radiation.
We don't talk enough about this in our
day-to-day lives,
but there's been lots of science around
radiation and Cath labs.
And if we look at the various positions
and roles within the Cath lab on the
right hand side here,
you can see that at the head of the table
#1 and #2 are the echo or implanting an
EP physician.
Or the anesthesiologist or anybody doing
jugular access procedures #3 would be the
EP assistant,
which would be on the other side of the
table where typically dual radiation
protection is not available in most
systems today.
The operator in the radiology tech or the
assistant would be then in the primary
position,
4:00 and 5:00 and then the circulating
nurse number six.
Now remember while we are all as
physicians and operators closer to the
patient and the radiation source,
in reality the nurses in every case,
we are only in certain cases during the
day or week.
So that while per case the nurse dosing
may be lower,
they get a they get a fairly voluminous
dosing perspective.
So if we look now on the left hand side,
we see that and we just focus on the blue,
blue bars here,
we can see that the average dose that
folks in the various positions receive is
can be quite different,
but striking and dramatically a lot,
especially for the people at the head of
the table, even with shielding.
So the echo anesthesia and EP techs who
are at the head or side of the table
where there's no radiation shielding can
receive significant doses of radiation.
The angiographer and radiology tech or a
fellow whoever standing next to that
person receives somewhat less.
And then the nurse,
the circulating nurse receives about the
same as the assistant,
but remembering that she,
she or he will get that all day every day.
Now,
if we look at what the average the
radiation exposure is for interventional
radiologists as an example of a cohort
who receives radiation in their work,
we see that again,
3 millisieverts per year.
And if we look at the average nuclear
power plant worker,
they receive about half of that.
So we're not talking about, you know,
inordinate, sorry,
inordinately small amounts of radiation,
but in fact fairly significant amounts of
radiation.
And this has its effect.
There are now documented effects of
radiation related illnesses in doctors,
nurses and techs.
There's a three,
three fold risk of cancer,
specifically brain,
hematologic and skin carcinoma.
A6 fold risk of cataracts and
specifically posterior cataracts,
which are a signature of radiation
exposure.
And then there's cardiovascular disease
as well.
So that's on the oncologic side,
but what about on the orthopedic side?
Even though we are still exposed to a lot
of radiation and having the effects on
the oncologic side,
we we are wearing what we think is
adequate protection and it's heavy and we
wear it a lot during the day.
And if we look at physicians across the
spectrum of orthopedic injury,
we see that at least 1/3 of physicians
will have back problems,
Another 15% will have neck problems,
another 15 or so percent will have leg
problems and other issues largely related
to the basically occupational hazard of
wearing lead all day.
And it leads to not only these issues of
orthopedic injury,
but also frankly some disability in the
sense that patients retire or cut back
from work because of their their injuries
or pain related to the wearing of heavy
lead.
So what then are the mandates for future
radiation protection systems given what
we just talked about?
Well,
we want to see less radiation across all
roles in the lab and we'd like to see
dosimetry documentation of this.
We'd like to see lower weight personal
lead.
So there's a lot of kind of hype out
there about shedding the lead and so on.
And while that's, you know,
ultimately a great idea,
I think it's going to be difficult to
entirely shed the lead.
And I'll show you why here in a second.
But lower weight lead is meaningful in
terms of its orthopedic impacts on how we
do in the long term.
So as an example, I've,
I've worn the light lead just to try it
on and it's like a raincoat or or a
winter coat.
It's very,
it's really very not very heavy and could
be easily and comfortably worn most of
the day.
Any,
any scattered radiation protection system
should have the flexibility to
accommodate multiple various procedure
types.
So neuro intervention, cardiac,
structural, coronary, abdominal,
lower extremity and so on that, you know,
the best system would accommodate all of
these various procedure types.
There should be ease of access to the
patient in emergent and urgent situations.
I can,
I can easily build a cave the patient can
sit in and I can't get radiation from
that patient,
But that limits my access to the patient
in terms of urgent situations.
It may make it difficult to communicate
with the patient because of actually
hearing what's going on or,
or needing to administer medications,
oxygen and so on.
And then lastly,
there should be limited workflow
disruptions.
And I want to spend a minute talking
about this because pretty much any,
any radiation protection system we can
imagine will will,
will require some attention to radiation
protection.
It's not going to be just, you know,
set it and forget it.
We are going to have to pay more
attention to radiation protection.
And there may be slight alterations in
how we do our work,
but it shouldn't really make major
disruptions in our workflow.
And if I can pause here for a second and
say that, you know,
in my generation of people doing
interventional work, radiologists,
vascular surgeons,
cardiologists and so on it,
we have really for the last 50 years or
so been the first generation in human
history to stand in front of radiation
with heavy lead on.
And now that we know what the effects of
those those activities are,
it would it would make sense for us not
to expose our next generation to those
same risks and orthopedic injury.
All right,
so I'm going to go through several
systems here and talk about how they're
set up,
what their intentions are in terms of
slowing radiation,
and also where there's a data or evidence,
I'm going to use that to highlight the
system.
So this is the Proteo modular system.
You can see that it's it's a augmented
radiation protection shielding with a
screen that goes over the patient's
abdomen or upper abdomen or lower chest
mobile system which Shields at the at the
head and then all this draping and other
shielding here that helps with scatter
radiation reduction.
This is what the system looks like on a
floor mounted device.
And here's the attachments to table and
or floor melted system.
And you can see what it looks like here
when it's assembled in this various
iterations.
The Rampart system is the next system
we'll discuss.
Here are the components of the Rampart
system.
They are again shielding.
If I you can see my arrow here,
the shielding in the upper right hand
here,
which goes over the patient's body and
really protects from scatter radiation
emanating from the patient,
which is the majority of scatter of
radiation that we get from the patient's
torso or thorax or abdomen.
There's liners underneath the patient.
There's support systems for hanging the
lead.
There's floor mounted systems which are
mobile and these are the curtains that
are aprons that go on the side of the
table.
And again,
floor mounted radiation systems for for
flexibility around the table.
So the Rampart has the ability to provide
radiation protection regardless of the
type of procedure that's being done.
So in this case,
you can see PCI structural EP in the
upper left,
aortic intervention on the upper right,
peripheral vascular the lower right and
neurovascular in the lower left.
And so there is some flexibility here
there.
There may be difficulty sometimes in
getting to the patient same thing with
the Proteigo because patients really
behind a wall of lead.
So that's an important consideration.
But this is fairly flexible system.
And again,
it can be floor mounted or fixed ceiling
mount and and or fixed floor mount.
So there's,
there's some flexibility in how the
system is configured within any
individual lab.
And again, we talked about the the,
the modular methods here.
One of the things you're going to see
common in these systems in most of them,
especially the augmented radiation
protection is that they'll have a little
enhanced rad pad.
So today we use a rad pad,
which kind of addresses part of the
radiation that comes off the patient.
But these rad pads are really blankets
that go over the patient and shield
scatter from coming from their patient
more completely.
So there are data using the the Rampart
system,
there are two randomized clinical trials
demonstrating nearly 99 plus percent of
radiation attenuation and 20% more 20,
sorry 20 times more protection than
traditional lead aprons and Shields,
which is terrific.
They're independent published head to
head trials with which show that it has a
significant and meaningful radiation
reduction over other radiation solutions
and it's superiority over the standard
shielding is evident using phantom models.
And there are I'm sure many more than
1700 real world cases,
but at least published showing this
greater than 99% reduction until
radiation dose across the variety of
interventional procedures we described
before.
So pretty good data and a system which
appears to nicely shield scatter
protection scatter radiation.
The next system is the Egg Nest.
The agnest is similar in the sense that
it's an augmented lead shielding solution
reduces radiation at least 97% for all
the staff in the room.
There are some disposable shield
components which are available and as
part of this device or system.
The there are ultra lead aprons both made
available and possible for everybody in
the room.
There are different styles of Agnes.
This is the XR and the next one is the
protect.
It'll it allows more flexibility in what
you're able to do with the eye eye and as
I mentioned before,
has disposable components.
And this is the Agnes Complete,
which has the most radiation protection,
at least 99%,
allows ultralight aprons for everyone.
It's ceiling mounted and again,
has an optional disposable shield
component.
Here's what the system looks like
installed.
There's some flip components that come
off that that that can be moved on or off
the position from the table.
There's a skirt, there's a shield.
Actually part of the the pad is a is a
shield so that there's no scatter coming
off the table itself.
And it actually quite,
quite a flexible system and allows lots
of different types of procedures.
This is that drape I talked about before,
which is kind of the augmented rad pad
which many of the systems will
incorporate.
There had been good data developed
through Egg Nest and you can see here
that in the various positions that we
talked about before that just about
everybody in the room gets at least 95%
or more radiation protection with the
with the exception of the nurse and the
anesthesiologist which have just a tick
less than that.
So pretty good radiation protection and
allows for a reduction in late lead to
light lead.
This is what the the Eggnest data looks
like if you were to compare it to other
standard shielding and it has
significantly really orders of magnitude
less radiation dosing as compared to what
we use today.
And lastly,
the radioaction dynamic smart shield.
This is a a different type of system in
the sense that it doesn't really involve
enhanced lead shielding and radiation
that drapes around the table of the
patient, but actually attaches to the eye,
eye and the source.
And the shield actually has five
programmable tungsten segments which
envelope the patient.
I'll show you a video in a moment and
allow a flexibility and workflow.
These systems are fully integrated into
the C arm at a bedside control.
And as you move the eye eye,
the system will come up and down.
I'll show you that in a moment.
And there's a hover mode which allows you
to move the table and the system just
comes up a little bit,
allows you to move the table while
maintaining some radiation protection.
There are there are levels of safety,
including both proximity and contact
sensors, which keep the patient safe.
And this hover mode I described before
allows you to be protected while you're
still panning X-ray for X-ray runs in
positioning.
So let's take a look at this in video
format and I'll try to narrate this as we
go.
So as as mentioned before,
it's attached to the eye.
Eye.
These tungsten fingers come out and they
envelope the patient and then flaps come
down and basically enclose the patient
and really grab the radiation where it's
originating in terms of both the
generation and scatter.
And you can see these are extreme angles
that are easily able to be accomplished
and still provide radiation protection.
I've already spoken about the steep
angles here and you can see the various
examples of that.
And it is programmable in terms of how
you want individual tungsten pieces to
come down.
Excuse me.
So that for any given procedure,
like an EP procedure or something like
that,
you could have different configurations
because it's attached to the imaging
system.
It's an FDA Class 2 device.
The FDA has to clear its use and has,
and you can see in the bottom screen here
an installation at Saint Francis Hospital
and Richie Schlafmis lab,
and that's Evan Schlafmis next to him.
And they've been Richie.
If anybody knows Richie,
he does dozens of procedures a day,
works very quickly,
and he's been very happy with the
workflow with this system.
It does block scatter radiation at the
source and provides at least 90%
radiation protection to everybody in the
room.
And we can use light lead with this
system as well.
Didn't mention before,
but because the system really is attached
to the eye eye and lifts up quickly,
you can get immediate patient access just
like you would with any eye eye.
And we've talked about the steep
angulations and easy turnover related to
this.
So in summary,
as we look across these systems,
there are multiple protection systems
that are currently or soon to be
available in the United States.
That's great for us and for the next
generation of interventionists.
The Shed the lead moniker is really
aspirational and may require state
regulation changes or exceptions,
but the light LED is a very likely and
acceptable endpoint and to me that makes
the most sense.
There may be times when radiation
protection may not be available to you
because of various things going on in the
room,
and you'd be good to have LED on at that
point.
System acceptance I think will hinge
largely on the ease of use,
the flexibilities for various procedures,
and the set up times and disposals.
And I think the days of ignoring sadder
radiation are hopefully coming to a close
and we have to give a little more time
and thought,
possibly some of the ease of navigation
to achieve superior protection.
But it's worth it, excuse me,
to both reduce radiation protection and
get out of our heavy lead.
Thank you very much.
I hope this has been informative and I
look forward to our next generation of
interventionists having less of a load
than we did in the last 40 years.
Thank you.
Hello everyone.
My name's Lancer Smith and I am a health
physicist at Heartland Physics.
Today I'm going to be talking to you
about understanding real time dosimetry,
really kind of how to monitor and protect
yourself using dosimetry and some of the
pitfalls of modern day dosimetry in your
typical dosimetry that you use.
Yeah.
So there are no disclosures that I have
to present to you for this presentation.
So anyone who's working with in
fluoroscopy or in a Cath lab or anything
like that,
you have a unique risk that you're
dealing with.
And that's the fact that you're among the
highest exposed radiation workers in the
world and that includes nuclear power
plants and everything.
So if you're working in a Cath lab,
you usually have some of the highest
exposures of anyone.
And the reason why you're getting so much
exposure is because you're getting
scatter coming off the patient and you're,
what's happening is the fluoro is hitting
the patient,
it's bouncing off the patient,
and then you're getting that scatter off
of them.
So you're getting that constantly every
day, every case that you're dealing with.
And some of the potential risks that you
might have down the line from a long
career in the Cath lab,
you might get cataracts,
you might start to have some skin damage.
I know some people have talked about like
losing hair on their legs or arms.
That's from radiation exposure typically,
and there's even a potential risk of
cancer down the line if you're exposed to
too much radiation chronically for a long
period of time.
So you kind of have some unique risk
working in fluoroscopy.
And I'm not saying that you will receive
those risks or you'll have those outcomes,
but you kind of have a higher likelihood
of getting those outcomes.
Now,
we're all familiar with our dissimeters
that we wear.
You know,
they're kind of just a badge that we put
on our chest on the outside of our lead
apron or kind of at our collar level.
And you wear them for a month or maybe
1/4,
depending on the rules of your hospital
and where you're working.
And you send those back to the provider
of those dosimeters.
And you don't really get feedback for
about a month after that, so.
Typical dosimetry,
you don't really know if you're being
exposed to a lot of radiation or not
until months down the line in a lot of
cases.
So it's more of a reactive solution than
a preventative solution for our typical
dosimeters that we use.
So you got that delayed feedback and you
know you can't see radiation,
you can't feel it, you can't taste it.
So you really don't know what you're
being exposed to a lot.
And so you're not getting any of that
immediate feedback or alerting saying,
hey,
you're in a high radiation area at this
moment, you know,
standing in a particular spot around the
table.
So you're not getting that feedback in
real time with your typical dosimeters.
And if you have some sort of, you know,
accidental habit that is unsafe and you
don't really notice it, there's,
there's really no way to go back and
track how did you get a really high
exposure during your work with the
typical dissimeter.
So there's a lot of limitations with it.
And dosimeters are good for you and you
should be wearing them,
but there are some pitfalls to it.
So real time dosimetry,
if you're not familiar with it,
it's very similar to your dissimeter that
you wear right now.
It's just a wear on flippable dissimeter.
You know,
clip it on the outside of your lead apron
and it'll usually display how much
radiation you're being exposed to.
It might display it on the dosimeter
itself.
But also they're typically, you know,
connected to some sort of network in the
Cath lab.
And there's usually a screen or some sort
of display hub in the area where it shows,
you know, who's getting a lot of exposure.
And they have some really nice graphics a
lot of times on those screens to show
like, you know,
what's your dose rate and how much
radiation are you getting?
And you're getting that in real time.
So you're,
you're seeing how much exposure you're
getting at that moment.
So you know,
at that moment if you're in a high
radiation area or if you need to step
back or if you know the shielding that
you're using, it is a place exactly right.
So real time dose symmetry gives you that
immediate feedback and let you correct
maybe any accidental unsafe habits that
you might have and let you correct that
immediately.
So some of those benefits that I talked
about,
it enables immediate behavior change.
You can see, you know,
the fact that there's a lot of exposure,
go ahead and make a change right there
immediately and you don't have to figure
out what it was months down the line.
It can reduce your dose drastically.
And this is very common.
There's a lot of studies out there that
talk about how real time,
just image or just symmetry gives you
that immediate feedback and you make
those immediate changes and it reduces
your dose.
It improves your awareness of how to use
your protective equipment,
such as your overhead shielding or
anything that you might have.
It lets you know that certain positions
are better than others around certain
patients.
It also might remind you to put it on or
put the overhead shield down if you're
not using it.
And really,
it prevents that silent overexposure over
your career.
And if you're able to prevent that,
then you're also able to prevent some of
those negative, you know,
outcomes that I mentioned earlier,
such as cataract, skin damage,
potential of cancer, things like that.
So how does this work into the workflow
of, you know,
working in the Cath lab every day?
So just so you know,
your exposure limit for an entire year is
5000 milligrams.
So we measure dose in in milligram.
You're as a radiation worker,
you're allowed to get 5000 milligram in a
year.
So if you were to average that out over,
you know a year you're working,
you really don't want to get over 2 1/2
Millerim an hour.
That's your dose rate.
How many Millerim do you want to get in
an hour?
2.5 Millerim.
So if you're looking at one of those
display hubs and you're using real time
dose symmetry,
anytime you see that your dose rate is
over 2.5 Millerim an hour,
you're probably getting too high of a
dose at that point.
Now,
that doesn't mean you can't go over 2.
5 milligram an hour in some situations,
you just don't want your average to be
over 2.5 milligram an hour.
So also real time dose symmetry enables
workers to identify those high dose rate
conditions during floral runs and it lets
you know, you know, hey,
whenever I use Sinai,
I see my dose rate goes up a lot.
So maybe I should step away if I'm using
Sinai or things like that.
But anyway,
it just allows you to get that
information that you need to reposition
yourself, reposition your Shields,
you know,
step away a little bit from the table if
you're using certain floral runs,
things like that.
It just really helps you work and work
safer without really interrupting or
being in the way of anything that you're
doing.
So anyway,
some practical applications that you
might notice.
If you're using real time dosimetry,
you'll notice that there are some high
dose rate moments like I mentioned
earlier, cine.
And if you're doing a comb beam CT run,
you know,
those are really high dose rate moments
and those are areas that you'll see your
real time dosimeter probably start to go
up a lot.
I know a lot of times with comb beam CT
runs,
a lot of times you'll just want to step
out of the room.
But with cine,
that may not always be possible.
So it kind of lets you know when you're
in those situations and also lets you
know maybe step behind a shield.
It also helps staff avoid staying too
close during those prolonged runs.
You can even use it,
It's great for training if you have new
workers in the Cath lab and they can put
those real time dosimeters on and then
they can just be alerted immediately that
they're in a high dose rate area.
And it's it's great feedback,
especially for people early in their
career, lets them know, hey,
if I stand behind the shield, you know,
you can really see how much your dose
rate drops in certain situations.
And also it provides the data to optimize
your workflow and helps you to reduce any
unnecessary exposures.
So, you know,
one rule is you always want to be looking
at the screen when you're on the floro
because if you're not looking at the
screen, it's kind of wasting floro,
you're getting unnecessary exposure.
So you know,
it kind of just gives you all that
feedback all the time.
And really all of those things that you
learn while using real time flora or real
time DOS symmetry, it,
it starts to become second nature over
time,
all those safe habits that you might
develop and just the closing thoughts
kind of like a little overview,
real time dosimetry and helps enhance the
radiation safety culture that display hub
constantly showing dose rates up in the
Cath lab.
It's just a constant little reminder, hey,
you want to be safe with the radiation
that you're using,
that immediate feedback.
It's a very effective way to reduce
expiration dose to the workers.
Probably one of the most effective ways
is just knowing that information and it
gives people accountability because
everyone's dose is displayed on the
screen at the same time.
So you can really notice that person A is
in a high dose rate and person B might
tell them to move or change positions if
possible,
if that's possible during the case.
And in reality,
it probably should be the standard of
care in these Cath labs,
mainly because of, like I said,
Cath lab workers are so overly exposed
all the time.
And this just just knowing this
information reduces your dose a lot.
And it really can reduce the likelihood
of those negative biological effects that
you get from radiation exposure.
And with that said,
that's the presentation.
Thanks for listening.
I have my e-mail down below if you want
to reach out to me.
And thanks for being here.
Hi, everybody.
My name is Ajay Kirthane from Columbia
University in New York.
And I'm going to talk to you about why I
think your health should really come
first and why so many of us kind of
ignore that fact.
And I'll give you a little bit of a
personal story to tell you how I came to
realize that these are my disclosures.
They don't have anything do pertinent to
the the topic at hand.
But I will say an important disclosure is
that I'm a physician,
which means I definitively don't take
care of myself.
So that's the background for this talk.
One of the reasons that I don't think
many of us physicians take care of
ourselves is because our job is one of
the, I think,
the greatest jobs in the world.
We're proceduralists.
We take care of patients.
I'm an interventional cardiologist and I
like this picture or this analogy.
This is Chris Hemsworth, Thor,
and he basically says, you know,
this is what heroes do.
He's looking debonair.
He's looking great.
Certainly we don't all look like Chris,
but certainly we feel great in the lab
doing the things we do.
And this is just an example of that.
This is a case,
an angiogram of severe coronary or
disease.
Patient didn't want to have bypass
surgery and I was able to treat this
patient effectively.
Immediately after the procedure,
the patient actually told me that they
noticed they could breathe better,
they were feeling better,
and I left this feeling really,
really good about but what I could do.
And that's one of the reasons why I think
as clinicians,
we expose ourselves to radiation and the
orthopedic injuries and things like that
that come along because what we do is
truly remarkable.
The purpose of this talk is to talk a
little bit about how we can be a little
bit more thoughtful about how we address
those issues and at the same time take
care of ourself so that we can
essentially continue to do what we do for
longer.
There's a survey in 2023,
the Interventional Society for Cardiology
and Interventional Cardiology basically
did a survey on occupational health
hazards of working in the CAP lab.
Because we're exposed to radiation all
the time, we have to wear lead, etcetera,
and it's quite sober.
There's about 2/3 of us who,
because we're wearing lead,
probably have musculoskeletal pain.
Obviously as you get older you have
musculoskeletal pain,
but it's certainly exacerbated by bearing,
wearing the lead that we wear every day.
60% or greater had greater than one
orthopedic injury,
with 34% of third patients experiencing
1/3 of physicians experiencing lumbar
spine injuries.
And one in five people actually had to
limit the amount of time they spent in
the cardiac catheterization laboratory.
And this is not just for the clinicians
and the physicians that are working.
It's also the techs who work alongside us,
the nurses who also have to wear lead as
well.
In addition,
the reason that we are incurring these
orthopedic risks from wearing lead is
because there's a three fold higher risk
of cancer and radiation injury compared
with the general population.
So this is something that's necessary in
a sense,
because we need to protect ourselves.
The,
the protection that we have is not always
fully protected.
It's only where we're wearing the lead.
But then that engenders another set of
injuries such as orthopedic injuries.
And this is the real deal.
I think we know about this.
We don't really talk about it a time.
It's kind of just like part of the
business of going to do what we do.
It's,
it's just the price we pay to take care
of these patients.
But it's important to understand this is
happening to real people around us.
And so anecdote #1 Dean Cariakis is a
very, very well known cardiologist.
He's been a pioneer in our field and he
had had for many years, multiple issues,
but it really came to a head in 2024 when
he basically couldn't stand or use his
arms.
He had complete cord compression with
like, you know, basically paraplegia.
He underwent urgent decompression of the
cervical spine.
He actually had to be in the hospital bed.
He had to straight calf himself and walk
with a Walker.
And he's back working now.
But this was a horrible thing that
happened to him and he had had signs
prior to this work,
he was having neurologic issues,
would take some steroids,
it would go away, it would happen again,
etcetera.
Their reason this happens is because we
in the Cath lab are exposed to
extraordinary stresses on our body,
their spine in particular.
And this is just an example,
these folks have specific radiation
protection that's meant to improve
radiation shielding and certainly does,
but they're still leaning over like this.
And when you lean over like this,
you put a lot of flexion on the spine up
here and you're wearing lead in addition
and standing there for a longer period of
time.
And so this, this can be a real challenge.
And I credit Ajar Kochar,
who's done a lot of work in this area to
start bringing these things forward.
He's a younger guy who's starting to
bring these things forward.
Here's anecdote #2 Kenny Rosenfeld,
another interventional cardiologist,
is actually going to win the TCT Master
Operator Award later this year.
This is his MRI.
And he shows this, this slide.
There's basically no discs anywhere here.
There's bulging disc up here compressing
the, the, the, the,
the roots and everything.
And he's had multiple spine surgeries and
it's still limited in terms of doing what
he wants to do.
But I'll be confessed,
I'll confess to you that, you know,
when I see older physicians like this,
even though stooped around and walking
around you,
you never think that's going to be you
because you always kind of assume that
this is just, you know, I'm young,
I'm healthy, I feel great.
And that's kind of how I was.
I basically would run.
This is me running a half marathon.
This is me skiing.
And I would have a good time with my
family.
This is my brother and me after we
finished the half marathon and,
and I just kind of never thought this
would occur.
I almost liking it to when you go to the
park and you're not a dog person,
you all of a sudden notice there are all
these dogs in the park after you get a
dog,
it's just this thing that until it
happens to you,
you don't necessarily know.
And so for me,
I was doing great like this until all of
a sudden this was my MRI.
And when you look at this MRI basically
here, all the nerve roots,
that's kind of a normal area.
And this is this black thing is my disc
that's basically taking up the space
where those new nerve roots are.
And I had excruciating pain and I
ultimately had to have surgery and this
was a problem.
It basically, you know,
you're confronted with it.
You say, Oh my gosh,
I need to limit my exposure, etcetera.
But it turns out I'm not alone when
looking at myself because if you look at
these rates stratified by age,
as we get older, it goes up and up and up.
But even when we're younger,
there's a pretty significant risk of
orthopedic injury as a whole in people in
my field,
younger interventional cardiologists.
And I think I borrowed the slide from Bob
Foster, who's kind of dedicated his,
you know,
sort of next phase of the life to,
to trying to make radiation better for
patients.
And there are other people out there for
physicians and others,
and there's other people out there doing
the same thing.
Basically,
when you start talking about this,
you realize that people are having to cut
back on their time in the lab because
they're pregnant.
They're, you know,
there's a rate of background cancers that
are happening, orthopedic injuries,
etcetera.
And this effects all members of the team.
And so we need better standards and
better safety precautions to be able to
take care of ourselves.
So how do we do this?
Well, there are systems like this,
their systems and, you know,
pause this for a second because that was
me dancing after I had my back surgery.
We also got in our lab these types of
systems,
they could protect me so I didn't have to
wear lead.
And there are many systems out there that
are now designed to do this that are
getting a lot of attention.
But the problem is,
is we just kind of celebrate like this.
So I'm back working on Indian,
doing my dancing.
I feel great.
My spine's OK,
but you have to do more than that.
And so they're actually studies looking
at stretching things that we can do to
strengthen our core.
Obviously,
getting out of the lead is a really,
really important parameter and an
imperative.
But it's also important to continue to do
core stretches and the like so that you
can strengthen all those muscles and
everything that allows your back to be
essentially decompressed in the sense,
or at least to take up the strain so it's
not on your discs.
And that's really, really important.
This is a study that was done in the Mayo
Clinic Cath lab.
The problem problem is if you don't take
care of yourself,
then this kind of happens over life and
you get increasing weight over time.
And I'm not going to go through the whole
detail.
I've told the story at other conferences,
but suffice it to say that it wasn't just
the back surgery that allowed me to
exercise again,
you have to be disciplined about it and
you lose your discipline,
your weight goes up,
and then all kinds of other things happen.
Like for me, it was hypertension.
It was also elevated cholesterol.
And ultimately,
it actually became a diagnosis of
diabetes.
Unfortunately,
I actually injured my back a second time
and I had to unfortunately have a second
surgery.
And many patients,
people injure their backs.
They don't need to have surgery.
In my case,
the pain was so severe and excruciating
that I did need to have it.
And the reason also is beyond what we do
in the lab,
we also have this issue if we're on our
phones, if we're leaned over,
it's essentially like adding weight to
our cervical spine on the order of 40 to
60 lbs just by leaning over and being on
our phones all the time,
being on screens all the time.
And if we don't take care of ourselves,
we neglect the ways that we can avoid
this.
So now I change how I sit,
I've changed my chair,
I do all these core exercises, etcetera.
It turned out though,
before I do that now ignorance was bliss.
So before my second or after my second
back surgery,
I've been back back skiing again.
I was playing the guitar with my posture
is terrible here I was eating,
eating poorly.
And what ended up happening to me is with
all this,
my hemoglobin A1C went almost into the
diabetic range.
So what I've done since then is you need
something to action change.
For me,
this was the big thing that drove change.
Once I saw this,
I dramatically changed my diet.
I've been more assiduous about working
out.
My back actually feels better than it's
ever felt even after the first surgery
because I'm really,
really meticulous about what I do.
And as a result,
I've been able to drop like 20 lbs or
more.
And in fact, my A1C is now normal.
But the biggest question is,
will this last?
Am I going to take care of myself?
I think I am,
because I'm sufficiently motivated now
that I've had two surgeries,
now that my hemoglobin A1C is diabetic.
But I think many people out there are not
sufficiently motivated,
and they really should be.
And maybe they hear this talk and they're
a little bit more motivated.
So the moral of the story is I think we
have a great job,
but we really need to take care of
ourselves so we can continue doing that
job,
especially when the job is inherently
dangerous to us.
And I mean, all members of the team,
irrespective of where you stand in the
room, you're going to be exposed.
And you have to wear lead if you don't
have one of these systems.
And so as a result,
you need to be fortified.
And so that initial slide I showed with
Chris Hemsworth actually is a part of a
longer clip.
I think the longer clip is probably more
apropos of how we really are heroes.
And this is the whole clip.
I choose to run toward my problems and
not away from them because that's what
heroes do.
So you can see her face.
She's clearly not impressed because
obviously, you know,
we're our own worst enemy at times.
So for me,
the final checklist that I'll leave you
with is I do think that we need to,
irrespective of what we're doing,
do core stretches,
exercises and stretching.
It's got to be a daily routine for us
here on out.
Every member of our team,
we need to make MD appointments.
Don't just check your lipids at a
conference.
Actually see a Doctor Who's going to take
care of you and to address the issues
that you need.
Because those things that I had,
for instance,
the diabetes diagnosis and the
hypertension, etcetera,
could be taken care of in that way.
I think it's really important to address
and look for radiation protection in your
program and job.
Understand how it works,
understand where you need to stand to
reduce your risk,
and understand what ways you can reduce
your risk by getting out of lead
completely.
Because if you have the appropriate
shielding systems,
then that's actually a reality.
And many people are now negotiating jobs
based upon what they have in their
practices.
I think it's important we didn't touch on
this to deal with mental Wellness and
things like meditation as well,
because that allows you to be calmer.
That allows you to sort of reflect on
these things a little bit and take time
for yourself overall.
And in the end,
I just say do the things you enjoy and
relish those opportunities because the
road ahead, like in my case,
was bumpier than I expected.
And so I was out of Commission.
I couldn't run.
I couldn't do those things.
Fortunately, I'm now back.
I don't run anymore because of the
pounding on my back,
but I switched to bicycling.
And so it's really important to take care
of yourself.
Hope you got something.
Getting out of the talk and happy to take
any questions at this time.
Great.
Welcome everybody to the Q&
A session for session one scatter
radiation which you must know and those
were great presentations.
We have a star-studded group of
interventionalists and physicists here to
answer your questions.
Be sure to ask your questions in the in
the question and answer tab.
And also if you do you have any questions
that technical difficulties,
there's a help desk there that you can
also ask ask for if you're having some
issues with it.
So wanted to introduce the group that's
with us here today.
First of all, my Co director,
Doctor Bella Howson.
So Bella,
I don't know if you want to say a few
words, sorry,
I'm I'm messing around with this sound.
Hi everyone,
thank you for the introduction and thank
you to all our speakers.
This is fantastic Big fan of anything
that will promote our health and
well-being.
So thank you for joining us.
And like Barbara said that we really do
want to interact.
We want you guys to join.
We want you to ask questions.
So please there is no shame, No Fear here.
We are multinational faculty from all
over the world.
So please,
even whatever region you're from,
do not hesitate,
ask questions or share insights and,
and let's, let's make a change.
Great.
So the rest of the group,
I know you saw when they presented,
but Doctor Rogers from Nottingham, he's a,
he's a medical physicist and original
medical physicist expert.
We have Doctor Muck chief vascular
surgery in Ohio.
Doctor Gray was going to join us.
He gave a great presentation,
but he had to jump on the podium.
So he's trying to time this right.
Couldn't quite get it,
couldn't quite get it right with.
But he's he's presenting additional data.
Elsewhere.
We have Lancer Smith,
who's also a health physicist and and
then Dr.
Curtain from Columbia.
So so anyway,
I wanted to kind of throw it out there,
I guess is,
is kind of the first thing and maybe
Doctor Rogers, you can help,
but but what do you think is the kind of
the most common knowledge gap that you're
seeing and trying to understand radiation
of what you're seeing among
interventionalists and the staff in these
labs?
I think there's two related things.
One is the issue of people don't want to
stand by the detector.
When you're going into oblique
projections,
which is when individuals are going to
receive the highest scattered doses,
still think it's safest to stand by the
tube because they forget about most of
it's coming backwards and sideways.
And then to top that off,
I think to be able to stand by the
detector,
you need to know which end is the
detector.
And I've seen a number of colleagues who
get confused as to which is the tube and
which is the detector.
I think it's got a bit easier now with
the flat panels because we just say stand
by the pizza box.
But yeah, that that would be my,
my biggest thing,
backwards scatter and forward scatter.
And for those of us who for probably for
many years didn't realize what that what
that was.
Are there any systems where it comes from
the top or is it always coming from the
bottom through the patient from the
bottom and then going to the image
intensifier on the top?
No,
it's not always coming from the bottom.
A lot of pediatric systems are over couch
tubes.
So they're the the saving grace there,
of course is Pediatrics or a lot thinner,
so the amount of radiation uses a lot
less.
But in those scatter curves I showed,
you were roughly getting an order of
magnitude difference between measurements
from the tube side to the detector side.
However, in real life,
it's probably more like a factor of 3 to
5, but it's still significant.
And if we can reduce it,
we should be reducing it, right?
Great.
Thank you.
Doctor Muck had a question for you.
You know,
in your lab among vascular surgeons,
what do you see kind of this generation
and,
and even the understanding among vascular
surgeons regarding radiation and
understanding radiation?
What's the best way?
I know in,
in cardiology we have obviously a big gap.
I'm sure we have it in,
in vascular surgery and some of these
other specialties.
Probably radiology has the best graph on
graph on grip on radiation.
But but what are your,
what are the young surgeons thought
process there?
And, and how do we bridge that gap?
Yeah.
Well, first, Bob,
congratulations on that incredible
movement.
You know,
there's five regional societies of
vascular surgery.
And I just came off my presidential
address that addressed this radiation
mitigation on Friday and the number of
young folks, medical students,
young residents,
junior faculty that came up to me and
said thank you for addressing this.
This is something that is always in the
back of our mind, but my generation,
it's never really been in our mind.
And I look back at over the years,
you know, Landon, you know,
thoracic endographs that the left crowded
after doing some Clavian with the sea arm
put an ice bag on it to cool it off.
And I just think, what did I do to myself?
So I think that that the younger
generation is, is becoming aware,
they are super appreciative of what you
all have started.
You know,
vascular surgery is way behind the other
specialties with this.
And I think we just need to continue to
get the word out via social media,
Instagram for the youngsters X or Twitter
for my age group.
But I,
I think we just need to continue social
media posts showing that the cases that
we're doing with Rampart, in fact,
is leading to, to,
to less radiation and better long term
health for our, our youngsters,
without a doubt.
And don't forget the team members,
the RTS and the RNS who are doing 3 to 5,
the case 3 to 5X the number of cases that
we do each week.
So again,
thanks so much for inviting me and an
incredible job on raising awareness.
Great, thank you.
Have a couple more questions, Bella,
I don't know,
I don't want to kind of haul the
conversation.
If you think of a question then just just
pop right in.
So if you, if you have one for anybody,
yeah, I think my question is,
is to everybody,
what do you think the way forward in
terms of bridging these gaps?
So I,
I know that some of the trainees have fed
back and they've suggested things like a
change to the curriculum.
So as, as it stands right now,
I am sure as we represent various
specialities,
I don't think most specialities have that.
It's not embedded in the curriculum.
I,
I know IR is a bit different because it's
heavily loaded on physical physics and
radiation,
but that's not necessarily adaptive to
everyday today procedures.
So just as a faculty as a whole, what,
where do you see where should we be going
with this?
What, what are your thoughts and feelings?
What would be a productive way to go
forward with this?
You know, I'll start.
I,
I would just say that it's really
interesting to me that when often
radiation safety is discussed,
especially outside of radiology fields,
that's like the dry lecture where
everybody's like, oh man,
I have to hear my,
I have to take my medicine.
And that needs to just,
we have to accept that,
that that's what people think and then
somehow make it more accessible.
And that was one of the things I tried to
do with my talk, you know,
talking about a personal experience,
because it's one thing to see people who
are sort of in a generation above walking
around and talking about their injuries
and that kind of thing.
But if you see somebody that I guess
looks a little younger and you're sort of
say that could be me,
and then you see them talking about it
and doing it in a personalized,
clinically relevant way,
then I think it becomes more accessible.
I think from the educational standpoint,
it's remarkable.
Yesterday,
I had a colleague who actually has had
back issues,
and I was encouraging him to use,
you know,
radiation protection where he can go
leadless free or free, free of lead.
And he was like,
I just got to get through this case.
It's going to take too long.
I was like, it doesn't take that long,
I'll set it up for you.
It's like fast.
No, no,
it's going to get through the case.
And so I think folks like that are not
going to be convincible unless something
happens to them.
But the younger generation,
if they sort of see an effort being made
and they see it's easy and facile to do
part of the curriculum,
that would be a way forward,
do you think a way moving forward to
making certain things compulsory?
So, I mean, luckily,
none of us have lived through the days
where you would never operate without
washing hands and scrubbing adequately
and putting appropriate gear on where,
I mean,
should we be going into that kind of
compulsory phase of you shouldn't really
be doing what you're doing if you've not
got the appropriate gear?
And then I guess this is more for Prof
Rogers.
What would should we be labeling as
appropriate?
We've had this discussion multiple times,
like you go to 1 hospital that's
appropriate for them,
you go another hospital,
exactly the same procedure is being done
and that is what's appropriate.
They are worlds apart.
So thoughts?
Yeah, OK.
I'm not a great fan of mandatory this,
that and the other because you turn
everybody off.
I think in terms of harmonizing the
access to protection,
that's the role for the professional
bodies to set guidelines.
In terms of education,
I have a lot of fear.
I don't know how it's in the States.
Obviously,
IR is a specialty in its own right.
However,
I understand that the training can be
mixed between old school and new school.
And I feel even in the UK, Bella,
although we do a lot of physics and
radiation protection, it's generic.
And I think the IRS,
when they go into the specialism,
need bespoke training.
And it needs to be,
as someone said it might have been AJ,
clinically relevant.
And it needs to be more accessible,
more fun.
And people like myself,
and I'm sure Lancer would agree with this
is we've got to make it accessible.
It's no good standing there droning on
like this.
It's not going to grab anyone's attention.
You have to have some key grabbable
messages that really get people's
attention.
So I think it's style.
It's with our online courses for the
cardiologist and the vascular surgeon.
My fear is they do it in a darkened room
with no help whatsoever.
How is that knowledge going to be
translated into clinical practice?
Are they really going to translate that?
So I see there's a real need for a more
holistic,
all round multidisciplinary approach to
this to change the culture.
And that's why I was really pleased this
week.
I had a call between the radiographers
and BSIR to talk about actually doing
this and coming up with some guidelines
around education and training and
radiation protection.
But the guidelines the the delivery will
be up to the local.
So I hope that answers your question.
I was just going to real quickly say I
fully agree.
I think that too many rules and people
rebel.
But I think if you can appeal to people's
common sense, so for instance,
if you don't want to use the full
shielding system, you know,
you can at least standardize using the
abdominal Shields,
whether you're going to use that,
whatever case,
that is a standard thing to do.
And if you appeal to the staff saying,
hey, you want to protect yourselves,
why wouldn't you just put these in?
That's a reasonable way to proceed,
I think in terms of some of the questions
in the chat, you know,
the dosimetry question is a,
is a perennial bugbear.
I think at some point it does have to
have some teeth.
There need to be ramifications if you
don't do it.
There's certain people who respond to
carrots,
certain people who respond to sticks.
You have to appeal broadly to both of
those constituencies.
And so that's kind of important.
And then the final piece with respect to
protecting everyone in the room,
every system you get has to be somewhat
addressing that whole issue.
And if you get everybody to buy into the
philosophy, we're protecting everybody,
then it's more likely that you're going
to get pulled through with any individual
therapy.
Very good.
We've got about two minutes left.
I did want to bring Lancer in here just
to kind of ask him.
You know,
we talked about these real time asymmetry.
And,
and I think it's a it's a great idea
because I think it does modify your
behavior in the lab if you know what
you're getting real time.
And I mean,
I practiced almost 30 years and,
and didn't really know what I was getting
with certain procedures or whatever,
because we never had anything really real
time.
Do you feel like that people engaged?
I know that at least here in the US,
there's a big issue with people even
wearing the badges because they're
exceeding their limits.
And so they still want to try to stay in
the lab.
And so,
so are we going to have the same problem
with real time dissymmetry where where
people are are wearing them for a short
period of time?
And then they, they just said, yeah,
I'm good.
What do you think?
And,
and how do we kind of promote that really
important?
Yeah,
I think that's a really good question.
I think the the real benefit with real
time DOS symmetry, you know, technologies,
technologies just advance so much from
our old school detectors where we would
just wear them and we don't know what the
readings are months into the future.
The real time DOS symmetry,
the fact that it gives you that feedback
immediately,
it lets you make immediate changes and it
also lets you know what you're doing that
is causing that high dose rate that
you're getting.
So if you if you find out that when
you're running, for example,
sin A and you see your real time dose
symmetries, just start going off the roof,
you know,
going going through the ceiling on that,
you could learn that, oh,
that's the moment that I'm actually
getting those really high doses.
Maybe I should step back two or three
feet from the table when I'm running sin
A and you notice that your dose drops
because you know,
exposure follows the inverse square law,
which mathematically just means you
double the distance you drop the dose by
1/4.
So it's a huge exponential reduction just
by distance.
So you can kind of like pick up on
certain things like that with your real
time dose symmetry.
You might also find out that you're using
that overhead shield completely wrong.
You might find out that if you place it
just a little bit different or you know,
there's just a series of things that you
can learn from that real time dose
symmetry,
which I think also goes into that
education piece we were talking about
earlier where if you just improve the
education and that that's,
I can't think of a better way to educate
yourself on your radiation exposure than
getting that real time feedback.
And honestly,
it should just reduce your dose.
It might make you feel more confident
we're going to dosimeter dosimeter and
you hopefully won't be reaching your
annual dose limits, you know,
earlier in the year if you're using that
at the same time as your normal dosimeter.
Well, great.
Well, that's a huge help.
But we're going to go on to the next
session.
I appreciate everyone that that spoke
everyone with this round table.
There are quite a few questions in the
chat.
What we'll do is we'll be able to
incorporate those in some of the round
tables toward the end of the day or or it
at the end of the discussions of some of
these other sessions.
So so we will take those into account and
bring those back to you.
Please join us now.
We have a,
a non CME innovation theatre entitled
Shedding shed, the lead total body,
total team protection,
transforming interventional lab safety
with evidence innovation and team
centered care.
So we'll return back to general session
at 11:50.
Thank you.